---
layout: post
title: "An overview of Europe’s fusion reactors for the general reader."
categories: [Fusion, Energy Infrastructure]
tags: [Fusion, Energy]
/assets/images/fusion-map.png

---

An overview of Europe’s fusion reactors for the general reader.
For an exhaustive list, down to university-scale machines, the IAEA’s fusion device database is the best resource available.  
 
ITER (France, Saint-Paul-lès-Durance)
The famed international tokomak under construction from 2010, designed to demonstrate Q≥10 burning splasmas. 
WEST (France, Cadarache)
A tokamak focused on long-pulse operation and the use of a tungsten divertor and wall conditions that will be used in ITER. Recently set a European long-duration plasma record (22+ minutes). 
LMJ/PETAL (France, near Bordeaux)
Laser Mégajoule is a major high-energy-density and inertial-fusion research facility. PETAL adds a high-power petawatt beam coupled to LMJ. 
JET (UK, Culham)
Europe’s former flagship tokamak. Operations ended in Dec 2023 and the site is moving into decommissioning and repurposing. 
MAST Upgrade, MAST-U (UK, Culham)
A spherical tokamak testing compact-reactor technologies and the new Super-X divertor concept to reduce exhaust heat loads. 
Vulcan 20-20 (UK, Harwell campus, RAL)
The Vulcan laser facility has been decommissioned to enable the Vulcan 20-20 upgrade, aimed at much higher power for high-energy-density physics and fusion research. 
ASDEX Upgrade (Germany, Garching)
A leading divertor tokamak used to develop physics and operating scenarios relevant to ITER and future reactors. 
Wendelstein 7-X (Germany, Greifswald)
The world’s largest stellarator, built to demonstrate the stellarator- a reactor optimised by  complex magnetic geometries with hopes of stable confinement and long-pulse operation. 
TEXTOR (Germany, Jülich, retired)
Tokamak that ran for ~30 years and shut down in 2013. This was historically important for plasma-wall interaction and materials studies. 
TCV (Switzerland, Lausanne, EPFL)
A variable configuration tokamak famous for flexible plasma shaping which was used to learn more about confinement, stability, and divertor concepts relevant to ITER and beyond. 
TJ-II (Spain, Madrid)
A flexible stellarator and Spain’s flagship magnetic confinement device. 
RFX-mod2 (Italy, Padua)
A major reversed-field pinch (RFP) experiment, an alternative magnetic confinement concept with emphasis on stability and control. 
FTU (Italy, Frascati, retired and being dismantled)
A compact high-field tokamak at ENEA Frascati. The site is now being cleared for the DTT facility, with FTU disassembly activities reported in 2024. 
DTT (Italy, Frascati, under construction)
Divertor Tokamak Test facility, divertor technolopgies at relevant heat loads for the next era of designs. 
EXTRAP T2R (Sweden, Stockholm, KTH)
A reversed-field pinch facility used heavily for stability studies and active feedback control of resistive wall modes. 
ISTTOK (Portugal, Lisbon)
A compact tokamak at Instituto Superior Técnico, noted as a flexible platform including AC-operation studies. 
COMPASS-U (Czech Republic, Prague, in development)
Successor to the COMPASS tokamak program, being constructed at the Institute of Plasma Physics for ITER-relevant research. 
GOLEM (Czech Republic, Prague)
A small tokamak used for education and remote experimentation, operated at the Czech Technical University. 
PALS (Czech Republic, Prague)
Prague Asterix Laser System is a major European laser facility researching high-energy-density plasma physics as well as research into inertial-fusion science. 


The next STEPs in Europe’s fusion pipeline
ITER is not a project to realise commercial fusion but rather an experiment commissioned to achieve a Q > 10 plasma gain and aid physicists and engineers in the development of the next generation of tokamaks.
ITER’s job in the fusion power pipeline
ITER’s research plan has been delayed since its conception in the 2010s. In the current timings, the project is estimated to reach full magnetic energy around 2036, with operation beginning around 2039. 
This matters because ITER is the most prominent project available to us that lets us:
run stable, high-power plasmas and control them reliably
manage heat exhaust and plasma-facing components under reactor conditions
validate physical models needed in the design of the next generation reactors
DEMO
In Europe’s roadmap, DEMO is framed as ITER’s successor and is seen to be the point where fusion becomes an electricity-producing technology and not just plasma physics. 
DEMO’s role is to demonstrate fusions power to deliver electricity to the grid as well as essential operation factors such as maintainability, the fuel cycle, and tritium breeding. Europe is actively reviewing and maturing DEMO concepts.
STEP: the UK’s prototype power plant
The UK’s STEP (Spherical Tokamak for Energy Production) programme has the aim of a prototype fusion power plant by 2040, planned for the West Burton site. 
STEP is a good example of how today’s research projects connect to the next generation of hardware. Work on spherical tokamaks like MAST-U is directly relevant to compact reactor layouts and the divertor technologies that STEP will need to develop at power-plant scale.
Stellarators and alternatives
Tokamaks are widely regarded as the most promising route to DEMO, but Europe is also seriously considering alternative, especially stellarators. If you can engineer them well enough, stellarators may offer steady-state operation without the same disruption challenges that tokamaks need to actively control.
Alongside publicly funded stellarator research (Wendelstein 7-X), Europe now has an interesting private company effort spun out from the Max Plank Institute for Plasma Physics: Proxima Fusion. The company is pursuing an optimised, high-field stellarator power-plant concept and has published a roadmap that includes a major coil milestone around 2027 and a first demonstration stellarator targeted for 2031. 
The takeaway
When fusion achieves its goals of large scale energy to the grid , it is unlikely to be a single machine that appears fully formed.

References
Message privately for references.

Question
What do you see as the biggest issue that fusion must face to change from experimental machines to power production?

